---
title: Thoughts on the challenges of dance
date: 2026-03-22 00:00:00 -0400
categories: [Blog]
tags: [Dance, Thoughts, Life]
---

People look at art differently. Sure you can broadly group people into categories like artist or audience, but the reasons and reactions we have for interacting with art will vary. My teachers started ballet to pursue a better life. One was drawn to the affluence and freedom afforded to dancers in their country, the other to the guarantee of education and boarding in the city. I found my way into ballet by chance as a treatment for poor posture and weak physique when I was younger.

Of course, our relationship with art changes over time and inevitably some will fall in love with an aspect of dance as we fulfill our initial purpose of pursuing it. For me, it is the joy of movement, the adrenaline of losing contact with the ground and being suspended in midair. The euphoria of pitting your mind and body against something that is unnatural or uncomfortable and emerging victorious. The belonging of joining an art practiced by many before you and offering your interpretation of a character in a story. These joys and more along with an unfortunate number of sorrows are to me part of the reasons I choose to continue to dance beyond my original intent.

I mentioned the idea of ballet being unnatural and uncomfortable, which extends beyond the body. While there are plenty of social and interpersonal aspects of dance that are judgmental and demeaning, I want to discuss a more personal and eccentric sense of discomfort. Most people who know me would describe me as laid back or, if you want to be a bit more harsh, passive. I suppose that the way I got into ballet, under the direction of others, is reflective of that as opposed to my teachers who pursued it on their own accord. Despite my enjoyment of the freedom of movement and freedom of expression afforded to me by ballet, it is exacting in its execution and appearance and often requires me to be cognizant. Over the years, many things have become instinctual and automatic but as I have less and less time to dance, I grow increasingly aware of things that I must now intentionally remember.

Today, I want to list out every single thing that goes into the simple first position, or just standing still, to see just how much I'm thinking about, or not.

First starting from a parallel position, rotate both legs outward so your feet are pointing away from each other. Initiate this action using the sartorius muscle in the inner leg and not with the outside of the thigh. Feel a sense of energy spiraling upward beginning from the inside arch of your foot and outward over the back of your foot, around your calves up to your knees, making sure that they are pointing in the same direction as your toes. Keep going around the inner thigh until you reach your glutes, which should engage. By engaging your glutes, your abs should also involuntarily engage and you should not intentionally squeeze your abs. From there, that energy goes in a straight line up your spine and keeps going up right behind the back of your head. Your chest should look proud but not puffed up and should not distort the straight line that travels up your spine. Your shoulders should be lowered and brought back by the feeling of your shoulder blades pulling together. Your arms should form an oval with the elbows pointing to the sides. Your hands should be a few inches apart.

I'm probably forgetting a bunch of things, but those are a few that I can think of off the top of my head. Also, many of these concepts are not very helpful in writing as they are simply my interpretation of how to achieve a certain aesthetic and build a foundation on top of which you perform more challenging steps. Often, you must see someone demonstrate or check your understanding so that you aren't using the wrong muscles and then experiment until you find a method that works for you. In that sense, ballet forces me to do something that I do not do often enough in life: reflect on myself. I have to evaluate what I am doing, be critical of any mistakes I find, and then undergo the process of fixing those mistakes. It's a tiring process and one that can easily lead to perfectionism and a negative self-image as you often cannot fix every issue and stay on top of every detail. For that reason, I often do let things slide so that I can enjoy the art without worrying about the canvas and finish the step without getting stuck on the preparation. And yet, I cannot discard those worries because ballet demands both form and function. I think that doing so would still be dance, but not ballet.
